[[ch-proxmox]]
== DRBD Volumes in Proxmox VE

indexterm:[Proxmox]This chapter describes DRBD in Proxmox VE via the
http://git.linbit.com/drbdmanage-proxmox.git[DRBD Manage Proxmox Plugin].

[[s-proxmox-overview]]
=== Proxmox VE Overview

http://www.proxmox.com/en/[Proxmox VE] is an easy to use, complete server
virtualization environment with KVM, Linux Containers and HA.

'drbdmanage-proxmox' is a Perl plugin for Proxmox that, in combination with
DRBD Manage, allows to replicate VM disks on several Proxmox VE nodes. This
allows to live-migrate active VMs within a few seconds and with no downtime
without needing a central SAN, as the data is already replicated to multiple
nodes.

[[s-proxmox-install]]
=== Proxmox Plugin Installation

LINBIT provides a dedicated public repository for Proxmox VE users. This
repository not only contains the Proxmox plugin, but the whole DRBD SDS
stack including a customized version of DRBD Manage, DRBD SDS kernel module
and user space utilities, and of course the Proxmox Perl plugin itself.

The DRBD9 kernel module gets installed as a `dkms` package (i.e.,
`drbd-dkms`), therefore you want to install `pve-headers` before you set
up/install software from LINBIT's repositories. Following that order ensures
that the kernel module is built for your kernel. If you do not follow the
latest Proxmox kernel, you have to install kernel headers matching your
current kernel (e.g., `pve-headers-$(uname -r)`). If you did not follow that
advice and you need to rebuild the dkms package against your current kernel
(headers have to be installed), you can issue `apt-get install --reinstall
drbd-dkms`.

LINBIT's repository can be enabled as follows, where "$PVERS" should be set
to your Proxmox VE *major version* (e.g., "5", not "5.2"):

----------------------------
# wget -O- https://packages.linbit.com/package-signing-pubkey.asc | apt-key add -
# PVERS=5 && echo "deb http://packages.linbit.com/proxmox/ proxmox-$PVERS drbd-9.0" > \
	/etc/apt/sources.list.d/linbit.list
# apt-get purge drbdmanage
# apt-get update && apt-get install drbdmanage-proxmox
----------------------------

If you are already (or have been) using Proxmox's version of DRBD Manage,
you can simply enable the repository and install `drbdmanage-proxmox`; you
don't have to change the existing configuration.

[[s-proxmox-configuration]]
=== Proxmox Plugin Configuration

The first step is to set up a static IP address for DRBD traffic. As Proxmox
is Debian GNU/Linux based, this is configured via `/etc/network/interfaces`.

The second step is to configure DRBD Manage as described in
<<s-dm-init-cluster>>.

The third and last step is to provide a configuration for Proxmox
itself. This is done by adding an entry to `/etc/pve/storage.cfg` with the
following content, assuming a three node cluster in this example:

----------------------------
drbd: drbdstorage
   content images,rootdir
   redundancy 3
----------------------------

After that you can create VMs via Proxmox's web GUI by selecting
"__drbdstorage__" as storage location.

.NOTE: DRBD supports only the **raw** disk format at the moment.

At this point you can try to live migrate the VM - as all data is available
on both nodes it will take just a few seconds. The overall process might
take a bit longer if the VM is under load and if there is a lot of RAM being
dirtied all the time. But in any case, the downtime is minimal and you will
see no interruption at all.
